Add fee design doc (#1225)
omisego/elixir-omg: docs/fee_design.md

## General fee mechanism design

### High level description

A Child Chain operator decides and enforces the fee format and the rule for transactions. The smart contracts do not check the rules for fee transactions. The rule enforcement is perfomed by the Child chain service. This is the case as long as the Plasma network runs in POA.

The transaction fee is implied for a *payment* transaction. It is the difference of the sum of inputs and the sum of outputs. For instance, if the sum of inputs is 10 ETH and sum of outputs is 9.9 Eth, the 0.1 Eth difference would be the transaction fee.

In order to exit fees, an operator would first put a special fee transaction into a plasma chain block. After that, the operator can spend that fee transaction output to a *payment* transaction. So the operator can exit it as a normal *payment* transaction. This removes the need to deploy an Exit Game contract for the fee transaction type as it requires only an empty contract to represent the existence of the transaction type and its protocol (using MoreVP instead of MVP).

A fee transaction is special and different from a normal transaction in that:

> 1. It does not need to consume any inputs. As the fee is implied (at least for the *payment* transactions), there is no output that consumes an input.

Author: It has an explicit output, only the input is skipped. Leaving as it was originally, we can adjust in the future if it's too confusing.

2. The verification of the fee transaction relies on Child Chain and Watcher only. 

> Since the smart contracts do not verify the fee transaction, the Plasma M(ore)VP security relies on the Watcher to check that the included fee transactions are following the rules correctly. If an invalid fee transaction is mined, the Watcher will consider the operator as having gone rogue, and inform the users to mass exit the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Plasma MoreVP security relies on the Watcher, not the contracts,  to verify the validity of a transaction fee. If an invalid transaction fee is mined, the Watcher will consider an operator as "rogue" and notify users to mass exit the network.
```

 Is it an explicit fee transaction type? Let's standardize how we describe this. Currently leaning on calling it a transaction fee in documentation unless I'm referring to an explicit fee transaction type/model.

Does the Watcher have an explicit "rogue" marker for an operator?

This decoupling of fee rule from smart contract gives the operator a more fine-tuned control on updating the fee rules. See the following paragraph for fee rule changes.

### Fee rules upgrade/change

> The fee rules are not implemented in the smart contracts but by the Child Chain, which sets the fee rules, and the Watcher, which informs users about the fee rules. Also, the fee transaction verification part is not bound to the logic of the fee rules. Fee rules come into force at the time the Child Chain processes transactions. A transaction not following the fee rules is rejected. Find more details on transaction verification in the design section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Child Chain sets the fee rules, while the Watcher informs users about the fee rules. The fee rules are enforced by the Child Chain during the transaction processing. Any transaction not following the fee rules is rejected. Note that the fee transaction verification part is not bound to the logic of the fee rules. Find more details on transaction verification in the design section.
```

# Fee Exit Design

This document describes the design for fee exits. It starts with the requirements, and then describes the basic fee mechanism within our Plasma M(ore)VP design. 

## Requirement

### Functional Requirement

1. The operator can exit fees to an address the operator owns.

> 2. Able to support fee exit for multiple transaction types where each transaction type can have different fee rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Able to support fee exit for multiple transaction types where each transaction type can have different fee rule.
```

Author: I think it should stay plural here.

3. Support the initial fee rule for Payment transaction, which is a fixed amount in cents per transaction.
4. More fee rules could be added later. Here are some examples:
   1. as a percentage of ETH gas. 
   2. as a percentage of notional (aka transaction dollar amount).

>    3. fixed token price... floating with USD or other fiat.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   3. fixed token price, floating with USD or other fiat.
```

The transaction fee is implied for a Payment transaction. It is the difference of the sum of inputs and the sum of outputs. For instance, if the sum of inputs is 10 ETH and sum of outputs is 9.9 Eth, the 0.1 Eth difference would be the transaction fee.

In order to exit fees, an operator would first put a special fee transaction into a plasma chain block. After that, the operator can spend that fee transaction output to a payment transaction. So the operator can exit it as a normal payment transaction. This removes the need to deploy an Exit Game contract for the fee transaction type as it requires only an empty contract to represent the existence of the transaction type and its protocol (using MoreVP instead of MVP).

A fee transaction is special and different from a normal transaction in that:

1. It does not need to consume any inputs. As the fee is implied (at least for the Payment transactions), there is no output that consumes an input.

> 2. The verification of the fee transaction relies on Child Chain and watcher only. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The verification of the fee transaction relies on Child Chain and Watcher only. 
```

I see this is re-occurring, sometimes we capitalize services sometimes not.

Author: Let's go with `Child Chain` and `Watcher`, will update everywhere.

Since the smart contracts do not verify the fee transaction, the Plasma M(ore)VP security relies on the watcher to check that the included fee transactions are following the rules correctly. If an invalid fee transaction is mined, the watcher will consider the operator as having gone rogue, and inform the users to mass exit the network.

This decoupling of fee rule from smart contract gives the operator a more fine-tuned control on updating the fee rules. See the following paragraph for fee rule changes.

### Fee rules upgrade/change

The fee rules are not implemented in the smart contracts but by the Child Chain, which sets the fee rules, and the watcher, which informs users about the fee rules. Also, the fee transaction verification part is not bound to the logic of the fee rules. Fee rules come into force at the time the Child Chain processes transactions. A transaction not following the fee rules is rejected. Find more details on transaction verification in the design section.

> As a result, fee rules updates are done by changing the logic of how the child-chain service would accept/reject an incoming transaction and how watcher/wallet update the logic to follow the new fee rule when generating transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, fee rules updates are done by changing the logic of how the child-chain service would accept/reject an incoming transaction and how watcher/wallet update the logic to follow the new fee rule when generating transaction.
```

child-chain or child chain or Child Chain

Author: Let's go with `Child Chain` and `Watcher`, will update everywhere.

Given this, the block verification should limit the block to be existing with a singe fee transaction type per block for simplicity. No matter which fee transaction types (1 or 2), it should calculate the fee balance of all transaction within the block. The only difference is how the output can be spent.

Child chain and watcher could even further deprecate old fee transaction types afterward if not needed anymore. The logic change could be done by upgrading Child Chain service and watcher together.

## Adding the fee exit feature to the Plasma Framework

This section will discuss how we can add the fee exit feature to our Plasma Framework using the chosen design, assuming we are launching the network without fee exit feature at the beginning.

> Since the network would first be running with a Payment transaction type which does not support having fee transaction type as input, to enable spending fee transaction into Payment transaction, we would need a Payment transaction v2 for that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the network would first be running with a payment transaction type which does not support having fee transaction type as input, to enable spending fee transaction into Payment transaction, we would need a Payment transaction v2 for that.
```
Not sure about this one... this is re-occuring, so maybe just italic this and lowercase? idk

2. Fee exit can batch an exit for multiple fees collected in different transactions

### Nice-to-have
1. Able to A/B test fee mechanism

### Out of Scope
1. The fee rules are enforced by the operator by accepting transactions in the child chain and not by the smart contracts. A POA Plasma network always gives an operator the chance to censor transactions, therefore having the fee rule enforcement implemented in the smart contracts is not a design goal. However, users are protected by the watcher should the operator exit more fees then they have accepted in their transactions. 

## General fee mechanism design

### High level description
Operator (Child chain) decides and enforces the fee format and the rule for transactions. The smart contracts do not check the rules for fee transactions. The rule enforcement is perfomed by the Child chain service. This is the case as long as the Plasma network runs in POA.

The transaction fee is implied for a Payment transaction. It is the difference of the sum of inputs and the sum of outputs. For instance, if the sum of inputs is 10 ETH and sum of outputs is 9.9 Eth, the 0.1 Eth difference would be the transaction fee.

> In order exit fees, an operator would first put a special fee transaction into a plasma chain block. After that, the operator can spend that fee transaction output to a payment transaction. So the operator can exit it as a normal payment transaction. This removes the need to deploy an Exit Game contract for the fee transaction type as it requires only an empty contract to represent the existence of the transaction type and its protocol (using MoreVP instead of MVP).

Reviewer 3: In order to exit fees...

A fee transaction is special and different from a normal transaction in that:
1. It does not need to consume any inputs. As the fee is implied (at least from the Payment transaction), there is no output that consumes an input.

> 2. The verification of the fee transaction relies on child chain and watcher only. There are potentially different ways of doing it, which is described in a later section.

Reviewer 3: There is only one way in this doc now as the non chosen design is removed. On the other hand, do we still have link/reference to it? Otherwise I think it might be better to leave it so people would know what we’ve been compared

### Fee rule change within a transaction type
Child chain service (the operator) needs to provide the fee rules to its clients. Clients can pass in the essential information such as address, token, transaction type ...etc, and then the child chain can accept transactions that pay sufficient fees.

This gives the operator the ability to update fees in a traditional SaaS way. The operator can adjust fee rules at anytime with flexible control. It can be upgraded with a feature flag or A/B tests.

## Chosen Design: Generate fee transaction to summarize the fees of each block

The design proposes that the child chain service automatically generates fee transactions at the end of each block. And the child chain and watcher perform the fee transaction verification on the block level. A valid block, apart from the existing transaction verification logic exits if:
1. All fee transactions are included after all other types of transactions in a block. 
1. A fee transaction's output is the sum of fees paid in a particular token by all transactions in a block.
1. There must be at most one fee transaction for a token per block.

> 1. There can be at most one fee transaction type per block. (PS. as we extends the Plasma Framework, there can potentially be multiple transaction types that all counts as "fee tx type")

Author: Thanks for the comments @InoMurko, didn't really re-read it before copy/pasting it 😅 I'll fix the issues you reported 🙇

Since the transactions are automatically generated from the child chain service, there is no need to do an authentication check. Inclusion of fee transaction is optional, however fees collected in omitted blocks are lost to claim.

### Transaction design
The transaction would be of the following format:

> ```

Reviewer 3: The Generic tx goes a bit off aftertastes latest change to doc. It has an extra field “metaData” now, can be any bytes32 as it’s our protocol.

Can you help add the field?

Author: Added :)

### Fee transaction type extension
Current Plasma Framework design is immutable on the ability of spending an output type in another tx type once contract deployed. So let's say we have payment v1 that can spend the fee claiming output. However, when we extend the framework with payment v2, we would need another fee output type that is able to be spent in payment v2. As a result, we would need fee tx type 2 as well during the extension. (As only new transaction type can create new output type)

Given this, the block verification should limit the block to be existing with a singe fee tx type per block for simplicity. No matter which fee tx types (1 or 2), it should calculate the fee balance of all transaction within the block. The only difference is how the output can be spent.

> Child chain and watcher could even further deprecate old fee tx types afterward if not necessary anymore. The logic change could be done by upgrading child chain service and watcher together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Child chain and watcher could even further deprecate old fee tx types afterward if not needed anymore. The logic change could be done by upgrading child chain service and watcher together.
```

> ### Fee transaction type extension

Reviewer 3: Is this duplicated?

Author: Yep removed it.

> ### Fee transaction type extension

Reviewer 4: Oh hey - duplicated chapter see :point_up:

Author: Yep removed it.

Current Plasma Framework design is immutable on the ability of spending an output type in another tx type once contract deployed. So let's say we have payment v1 that can spend the fee claiming output. However, when we extend the framework with payment v2, we would need another fee output type that is able to be spent in payment v2. As a result, we would need fee tx type 2 as well during the extension. (As only new transaction type can create new output type)

> Given this, the block verification should assert that all fee transactions in the block have the same transaction type No matter which fee tx types (1 or 2), it should calculate the fee balance of all transaction within the block. The only difference is how the fee claiming output can be spent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given this, the block verification should assert that all fee transactions in the block have the same transaction type no matter which fee tx types (1 or 2), it should calculate the fee balance of all transaction within the block. The only difference is how the fee claiming output can be spent.
```

> Child chain and watcher could even further deprecate old fee tx types afterward if not necessary anymore. The logic change could be done by upgrading child chain service and watcher together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Child chain and watcher could even further deprecate old fee tx types afterward if not needed anymore. The logic change could be done by upgrading child chain service and watcher together.
```

As a result, a high level steps of adding fee exit feature would be:
1. Implement the contracts to enable spending Fee transaction in Payment transaction V2
2. Implements the child chain and watcher logic to support new transaction types: fee transaction type and Payment V2. Need to be able to check the correctness of the transactions, including special logic for fee transaction and the changes of block verification logics.
3. Implement child chain to automatically generate fee transactions within each block.
4. Makes sure that clients update to new watchers
5. Could turn on the auto fee generation feature once all clients update to the new watcher
6. Deploy the PaymentExitGame for Payment transaction v2 that has the ability to spend the fee transaction
7. (Optional) update deposit verifier to use Payment transaction v2 directly
8. Wait 3 weeks for the new ExitGame contract to take effect
9. Spend fee transaction in Payment transaction v2 and exit.

> ## POC

Reviewer 3: Not sure do we still need this?

Author: Removing it.

* Fee transaction type that have special nonce output and would be spent by Payment transaction and exit via Payment transaction: https://github.com/omisego/plasma-contracts/commit/7e6bf7a5886a5b1131d5346a71e923a64fab4b38

## Reference

* Tetsuji blockchain fee design: https://github.com/omisego/elixir-omg/blob/master/docs/tesuji_blockchain_design.md#fees
* Scope of Five Guys
* Fee exit high level discussion: https://github.com/omisego/plasma-contracts/issues/165

## FAQ

Q1: Is it possible for the operator to start collecting fee now, but defer adding the new fee-exit ALD to some time in the future? 

> > Yes, it should be possible in the abandoned design. But be aware pre-collecting fee meanings we would need to put extra effort to migrate DB for fee feature during production on live. For instance, we would need to calculate the sum of fee while accepting new transactions, which might impact sum of fee too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Yes, it should be possible in the abandoned design. But be aware pre-collecting fee meanings we would need to put extra effort to migrate DB for fee feature during production. For instance, we would need to calculate the sum of fees while accepting new transactions, which might impact sum of fees too.
```

> > Yes, it should be possible in the abandoned design. But be aware pre-collecting fee meanings we would need to put extra effort to migrate DB for fee feature during production on live. For instance, we would need to calculate the sum of fee while accepting new transactions, which might impact sum of fee too.

Reviewer 4: Mentions `abandoned design` but it's no longer present in the doc. We need to rephrase the answer?

> > In the chosen design, we can defer the fee-exit feature to the future but we would lose all fee pre-collected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In the chosen design, we can defer the fee-exit feature to the future but we would lose all fees pre-collected.
```

Q2: How often does a fee exit get called?

> > (From Jeremy) I think this is for the operator to decide. We probably want to do this based upon finance requirements and risk management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This is for the operator to decide. We probably want to do this based upon finance requirements and risk management.
```

> In the future, we are planning to include the IFE transaction into the block if not already there. We might only include those transactions that follows the fee rule to our block. However, if an IFE occurs that does not follow the fee rule, it can still be valid in-flight exit and be processed.

> See: https://github.com/omisego/elixir-omg/issues/994

Q4: Should we collect fees when spending the fee transaction's output to a payment transaction?
> To keep the transaction processing code simple and to not introduce artificial code we can treat this payment transaction the same as any payment transaction which is spending regular inputs. Therefore when payment transaction will consolidate several fee-outputs it will be fee-free as a merge-transaction. Otherwise it needs to pay a fee which is collectable by another transaction.

Q5: How should excessive fees paid be handled?

> > They should be collected/exited normally, thereby decoupling fee requirements from fee collection. We can add some sanity check on client software to avoid some insane high fee appears.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> They should be collected/exited normally, thereby decoupling fee requirements from fee collection. We can add some sanity checks on client software to avoid excessive fees.
```
